Nanopore (#1043)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/metagenomics/tutorials/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/tutorial.md

> This sequence file is 51 MB of nanopore sequences. The 10026 reads found in this file contain 49190798 nucleotides.
> As mentioned before nanopore sequences are long reads and this is confirmed by a mean read length of 4906.3.
{: .comment}

## Importing the data into Galaxy

Now that we know what our input data is, let's get it into our Galaxy history:

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Obtaining our data
>
> 1. Make sure you have an empty analysis history. Give it a name.
>
>    > ### {% icon tip %} Starting a new history
>    >
>    > * Click the **gear icon** at the top of the history panel
>    > * Select the option **Create New** from the menu
>    {: .tip}
>
> 2. **Import Sample Data** [![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.1443246.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1443246)
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/1443246/files/RB01.fasta
>    ```
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Quality Control

## NanoPlot to explore data

The first thing we want to do is to get a feeling for our input data and its quality. This is done
using the NanoPlot tool. This will create several plots, a statisical report and an HTML
report page.

> ![NanoPlot example](../../images/nanopore_seqeunce_analysis/NanoPlot.png)

Reviewer: @willemdek11 can the Nanoplot galaxy tool also be made to produce this plot (of average read quality)? I was not finding the option to do so, but think it could be nice to show and then follow up this step with a filtering step by quality (or read length) orso before proceeding, what do you think?

Reviewer: oh, guess we would need the fastq input, do you happen to know if the publication you got this data from had fastq files as well?

Author: @shiltemann At the moment it is not possible in the Nanoplot galaxy tool, because I only incorporated the plots available for all formats.

# Obtaining and preparing data

We are interested in the reconstruction of full plasmid sequences and determining the presence of any antimicrobial resistance genes.
We will use the plasmid dataset created by {% cite LiXie2018 %} for their evaluation of the efficiency of MDR plasmid sequencing by MinION platform. In the experiment, 12 MDR plasmid-bearing strains were selected for plasmid extraction, including *E. coli, S. typhimurium*, *V. parahaemolyticus*, and *K. pneumoniae*.

> ### {% icon comment %} Background: Nanopore sequencing
>
> Nanopore sequencing has several properties that make it well-suited for our purposes
>
> 1. Long-read sequencing technology offers **simplified** and less ambiguous genome **assembly**
> 2. Long-read sequencing gives the ability to **span repetitive genomic regions**
> 3. Long-read sequencing makes it possible to **identify large structural variations**
>
> ![How nanopore sequencing works](../../images/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/sequence_method.jpg "Using nanopore sequencing, a single molecule of DNA or RNA can be sequenced without the need for PCR amplification or chemical labeling of the sample.") <br><br>
>

> > (Image credit: [Nanopore sequencing: The advantages of long reads for genome assembly](https://nanoporetech.com/sites/default/files/s3/white-papers/WGS_Assembly_white_paper.pdf?submissionGuid=40a7546b-9e51-42e7-bde9-b5ddef3c3512 ))

Reviewer: links don't seem to work in image captions :/

> > 4906.3
> >
> > This can be determined by looking at the NanoStats or HTML output of NanoPlot RB01.
> {: .solution }
{: .question}

For more information on the topic of quality control, please see our training materials
[here]({{site.baseurl}}/topics/sequence-analysis/)

# De-novo Assembly

## Pairwise alignment using Minimap2

In this experiment we used Nanopore sequencing; this means that sequencing results in long reads with overlap.
To find this overlap, Minimap2 is used. Minimap2 is a sequence alignment program that can be used for different
purposes, but in this case we'll use it to find overlaps between long reads with an error rate up to ~15%.
Typical other use cases for Minimap2 include: (1) mapping PacBio or Oxford Nanopore genomic reads to the human genome;
(2) splice-aware alignment of PacBio Iso-Seq or Nanopore cDNA or Direct RNA reads against a reference genome;
(3) aligning Illumina single- or paired-end reads; (4) assembly-to-assembly alignment; (5) full-genome alignment
between two closely related species with divergence below ~15%.

Minimap2 is faster and more accurate than mainstream long-read mappers such as BLASR, BWA-MEM, NGMLR and GMAP and

> therefore widely used for Nanopore aligning. Detailed evaluations of Minimap2 are available from

Reviewer 2: alignment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
therefore widely used for Nanopore alignment. Detailed evaluations of Minimap2 are available from
```

>      - *"Select an output format"*: `paf`
>
>    {% include snippets/select_collection.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

This step maps the Nanopore sequence reads against itself to find overlaps. The result is a PAF file.
PAF is a text format describing the approximate mapping positions between two
set of sequences. PAF is TAB-delimited with each line consisting of the
following predefined fields:

|Col|Type  |Description                               |
|--:|:----:|:-----------------------------------------|
|1  |string|Query sequence name                       |
|2  |int   |Query sequence length                     |
|3  |int   |Query start (0-based)                     |
|4  |int   |Query end (0-based)                       |
|5  |char  |Relative strand: "+" or "-"               |
|6  |string|Target sequence name                      |
|7  |int   |Target sequence length                    |
|8  |int   |Target start on original strand (0-based) |
|9  |int   |Target end on original strand (0-based)   |
|10 |int   |Number of residue matches                 |
|11 |int   |Alignment block length                    |
|12 |int   |Mapping quality (0-255; 255 for missing)  |

> View the outcome of RB12, it should look something like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
View the output of **Minimap2** {% icon tool %} of the collection against RB12, it should look something like this:
```

The mapped reads are ready to be assembled with **Miniasm** {% icon tool%} ({% cite Li2016 %}). Miniasm is a very fast Overlap Layout Consensus based de-novo assembler for noisy long reads.
It takes all-vs-all read self-mappings (typically by **Minimap2** {% icon tool%}) as input and outputs an assembly graph in the GFA format.
Different from mainstream assemblers, miniasm does not have a consensus step.
It simply concatenates pieces of read sequences to generate the final sequences.
The optimal case would be to recreate a complete chromosome or plasmid.
Thus the per-base error rate is similar to the raw input reads.
![Pairwise alignment](../../images/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/Miniasm.png)

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: De novo assembly
>
> 1. **miniasm** {% icon tool %} with the following parameters
>   - *"Sequence Reads"*: The `Plasmids` dataset collection
>   - *"PAF file"*: `Output Minimap dataset collection` created by **Minimap2** {% icon tool %}
>
>    {% include snippets/select_collection.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

The `Assembly Graph` output file gives information about the steps taken in the assembly.

The output should look like:

```

> S	utg000001l	GAAATCATCAGGCGTTTTTCACGATATGGACGGGAAGATGCGGAAATAGGCAGGAGGACATAGAAATGCCTGAGGGGTCTGGGATGGTGCGGGCAACGGATGTTATGGTAAATAAGCTTCCGTTGGTAAACCTGTAAGTTTTCAGGAACGAGACTCGTTTAGAACATCTAAAAAGCACATGAATGCTGCTATAGAAGCGACTGTTTGATGGTTCATGGTTTTATATTAAGGTAGATGAAAACTCAATACAGCGCTATTTAGAGACGCTTAAATGGCATTCTTGTATTTTAACGATGCAGAGTAACAGGCTCTAGCTAGTTATAGTACATCGAAAAGTTCATATAGGGACAAAACAAAGGGACTGAAATACATAGCCATAAGCTCGCTTCAAAGTCCTAACCACCAGCTATATTGCATGGGTTTGGTTAAGACATACGTCATGTCTTTGGGGCATATTATGGTGAAAAACGCGTTCATCTACACCAATATTTATACATTTCTCTTCAATAATGACGCCGTTTCCAGCCAACTTTGCTATATGGGTGACAATTTTCGCTTTTAAACGGAGATGTCTCCATGATTGAGCAGATCTAAAAATCTGCATTTTGTGCTGTGCAGGCATTACCATTCTTTCTATGCACAAACGTGCCGCGTCTTGCATTCTGCTTTGTATGCGGAGGTGCTCAATGAGGCTTTAACTACTCCCCTCCGTTAACGCCGTTCGTGTTTTAAACCGCCTTCTCGATAAAGAGTTTCACAGGTGCTGAAGAAATTCGCCTTTACGATGATCAGGGCGGGTGATTGGTACATCAACAACAGGCTTCTTGTTCTGTTTTGAGAGCATGAAGATCAGCCGCGATGGTAATATGTTCGTGTATTTGTCTCAAATACATTGATGACTATTACAACCGTCGTGAGTATCAGTTTAGTCAGCAGAGGCATGCTGTCGCTGTGCTCGTCAGCATAGAAAAGCCTCTACGGCCGCTCGTTTGCTTTTATCGCTAGGTGAGCTTGTCCCAGAAAGTATCCGTATGATTCTTGCGCTAATGATGATTAGGGGATATTATGTTTCTGGGGTTATTTTGTTGTTTTGCTGGCTTTCTCTACTATTAGAGAGCTTGGGGTTTCTTGGAAACGTTGAATGGGGTCCTCTAGCATGATTTGTTTGAGCTTCATCTGGTCTATGAAGCAGTCAGGAAGAGTCTTAAGCACGATGTTGGGTCTTAAACTAGACTAAAAATATAATATGCGAGCTTTTAACTCATAGACGTGTAGTTTTCACTCTTTTTGCTGGTGTTCTAAGCAAAAACTTCTGCATTACGCCTGTTTGTGGTTGCCTGTTATAAGATAACAGTAAAATCCATGCGTTTCTAAGGAGAAAATGAACAAAAGCTATCACTAAATCGTATTTCCAATAGAGGTTTCGTCCTCTTTGAAAGGGGTAGTTCATGAAAATTAGTTCATGGAAATGTTTATGATTTAGGTTGGAGTTATTAGGCGCAAAGAAGAAATATAAAAGGATAATTGAAGTTCTAAATCATTATGGTGATTGAGAGGCGTTATGAGCACAGCTAAGGAAAGTTAAGGAAAAAGGCACTCCAATGAGTAGTGCCAATGAATATTCTGGTCGTGATAGTATGAATCAAGATTACATCTAGGCAATCCATGGATATTATTATAGGTTTCTGTGGGCTGTTGGTTCGGTATTAAGTCAATTGTAGATGTAACCGAAGAAGAACTGAAGATTTAGGATACGAAGTATATAGGATAAGAGTTAGCGATCTTATCAGAAACTTTTTCTGAGTGGTGGGGATACATCTACTCCATTCAAAAGATATAATTCCTTGCGGGATTTTGGTGATTCCTTAAGATGTAGAGTACTACCCACACATACTAGCTGAAGCTGTAATTCATGAAATAAAGATAGAAAAATCTAGAAGGAAAATCAAAGGTTAAAGAAACGACTTTCCTTATGAATCAACTAAAAACATAAGATGAAGTGAGTTGCCCAAGTGGTCTAACATAATTTCTATTTATTAGGTGATAGGGCGAAACTGAAAGAAAAGAAATCTTCGAGATAGGGGTTTAAGCAAATCTGAAGTTGATATAATCATCCATCATGACAGGAGTCTGAGCACCCTTATGGCCAGCAAACAGCAAAAGCTATACTTGATGCTGACTATTTTGTTAAAATAATCAGGCCAGAGCTCACCTTAAATCTAAGTTAAACGCTTTCTTGGTCTATTCATGGGCTTAATGGCCTTACGCCAAACGCGCATGAGGAAGACATGTACGCAGCTCATTCTGCCTCTTTACAATCTGCATGTCTTTCCAGACAGGTAGGTGCTGCTATTTTAGATATAAAGGAAATTTAATTGCTGTTGGGCGCAATGATGTTCTAAATTTAACAGTGTGGCCTTTATAGTGCTGATGATGGTGAATGATCATCGCTGTGTCTACAAAGGTGGCAAATGTTACAATGAAGCAAGAAAATTAAATAAAGATAAATACAGCAAATATTGCTTTTCTGATAGGTTAAGAATTTGTCTGTTCAGTTAACTCAAGAACAAGCAGAAAAGGTTGCTGGAATGTCTACGAAGGTACTCCTGTATCATCAATCGACAGTACTCGCTCTATTCATGCTGAAATGGATGCTTCACAGCCCATCTTGCTAGACTCGAGATAGTGGTTTTGAAGATAAGGTTTTATATACAACTACGTTCCCCTGTCATAATTGTGCAGGGTATATTGTTGCTGTTGGTATCAATAAAGTTGTTTATTGAACATATGAAAAAGCAGCTTTAGAGTTGCTGATGATGCAATAACTAGAAGTTAACGAAAGTGGTAAAGTTTTATTTGAGTCCTTTGAAGGGGTTTCTACTGGAATATCATAGAAGTTCTTCTTTTCTACAGATGAAAGGATAGTAAGGTAATGCGGAGAAATATTCAACGAAGTATAAGAATCATATTGATATACAGTTTATTGATAGTTGGATTTTAATCGTGTGGCGGATATTTTCATTAACACAAAACAGATGCTGAAGCTCAAGTAGCCGTTCCATCTGGGACATAGTTAATCCGCTTCTGCCACCGATTCTCGACACCACCAACATCGGGTATGAATCTGTGACTCTGATGTTACAGAGCTTAATCTTGTGTACCAAAAACCACCATACCAACGGTGGTTTTCTCTGAGCTACTGCTCTTTGAGCCGAGGTAACTGGCTTGGAGGAGCTCAGTCACCAAAACTTGTTCTTTCAGTTTAGCCTTAACAGGCGCACAACTTAAGATGCTCCTCTAAATCAGTTACCAGTGGCTGCTGCCAGTGGCGCTTTGTCGTGCCTTCTGGGTTGGACTCAAGACGATAGTTACCGGGGCAGGCGCAGCGGTCGGACTGAACGGGGTTCGTGCGCTGGTCAGCTTGGGCGAACTGCCTGCGGAACGCTGAGTGTCAGGCGATGAGTAAAGTTTAAACAGCCATAACAGCAGGTGAAGAGCACCCCGGTGCCAAACCGAAGGCAGGAACAGAGCGCAGGGAGCTACCGGGGAAACGCAGGATCTTTATAGTCCTGTCCGGGTTTCGCCACCATGATTTGAGCGTCAGATTCTGTGATGCTTGTCAGGGGGCGGAGCCTATCGGAAAACCGGCAACGCGGCCTTTCTTGTTGCTTCTCCCATTCTCTCATTGCCTATGGCTTAATGTCTCTGTTCCCTCCGCTCGCCGCAGCGAACGACCGAGCGGGCGAGTCAGTGAGCGGAAGCGGAATATCTGCGGGCTTCTCTTTGGCACCGTACGCCATAGCGCATTTTAATACGATGCAGAATAGGGCGGGTACGCCGCAAAGTGACGTCACCTGACGTTCTGGATTACAAAGGTTAAAGCAGCGGACAGGAAATGTTTTGTGCCTAGCTATGCTATTCACAAGTAGCAGGACAGATGTGTTTTGGAGTACCATGACATAAAGACTCTGGTTAGCTCCCGCATGTTTGCTATCTTTGCTACCATTTGCTACTTTTGCTATCTCCAGGGTCTTCTGGTCTTTCAGTTGCTATCCTTTTGCTACTTTTGCTATCAAAATGCTACCTCTCCCTTCTTGCAATAAATGACCAAGGCACGTTAGCGATGTATACATCGCGCACCATAAGTGCCCCTTCCGAATCCCGTTCATCACTGTGTGATTAATCGAGGTTAAATCGACTACCAACGTAAAATCCTGCCATGCCTGACGGCTGACAACGCCCTCACGGTCGCGCAGTAAACTGCGCGCCCCTTTCACCGTTATCGGTGGGGTTCGTGGTGGCTTTCAGGGCGCTCGCCGGATTTTAACCGCTAAAATGAGCGATCCATGCGTTCGTG	LN:i:4357

Reviewer 3: you could probably artificially trim the first line and have some `...`? might make it a bit easier to see what's important. But I guess there isn't much discussion so maybe not important to do.

> S	utg000001l	GAAATCATCAGGCGTTTTTCACGATATGGACGGGAAGATGCGGAAATAGGCAGGAGGACATAGAAATGCCTGAGGGGTCTGGGATGGTGCGGGCAACGGATGTTATGGTAAATAAGCTTCCGTTGGTAAACCTGTAAGTTTTCAGGAACGAGACTCGTTTAGAACATCTAAAAAGCACATGAATGCTGCTATAGAAGCGACTGTTTGATGGTTCATGGTTTTATATTAAGGTAGATGAAAACTCAATACAGCGCTATTTAGAGACGCTTAAATGGCATTCTTGTATTTTAACGATGCAGAGTAACAGGCTCTAGCTAGTTATAGTACATCGAAAAGTTCATATAGGGACAAAACAAAGGGACTGAAATACATAGCCATAAGCTCGCTTCAAAGTCCTAACCACCAGCTATATTGCATGGGTTTGGTTAAGACATACGTCATGTCTTTGGGGCATATTATGGTGAAAAACGCGTTCATCTACACCAATATTTATACATTTCTCTTCAATAATGACGCCGTTTCCAGCCAACTTTGCTATATGGGTGACAATTTTCGCTTTTAAACGGAGATGTCTCCATGATTGAGCAGATCTAAAAATCTGCATTTTGTGCTGTGCAGGCATTACCATTCTTTCTATGCACAAACGTGCCGCGTCTTGCATTCTGCTTTGTATGCGGAGGTGCTCAATGAGGCTTTAACTACTCCCCTCCGTTAACGCCGTTCGTGTTTTAAACCGCCTTCTCGATAAAGAGTTTCACAGGTGCTGAAGAAATTCGCCTTTACGATGATCAGGGCGGGTGATTGGTACATCAACAACAGGCTTCTTGTTCTGTTTTGAGAGCATGAAGATCAGCCGCGATGGTAATATGTTCGTGTATTTGTCTCAAATACATTGATGACTATTACAACCGTCGTGAGTATCAGTTTAGTCAGCAGAGGCATGCTGTCGCTGTGCTCGTCAGCATAGAAAAGCCTCTACGGCCGCTCGTTTGCTTTTATCGCTAGGTGAGCTTGTCCCAGAAAGTATCCGTATGATTCTTGCGCTAATGATGATTAGGGGATATTATGTTTCTGGGGTTATTTTGTTGTTTTGCTGGCTTTCTCTACTATTAGAGAGCTTGGGGTTTCTTGGAAACGTTGAATGGGGTCCTCTAGCATGATTTGTTTGAGCTTCATCTGGTCTATGAAGCAGTCAGGAAGAGTCTTAAGCACGATGTTGGGTCTTAAACTAGACTAAAAATATAATATGCGAGCTTTTAACTCATAGACGTGTAGTTTTCACTCTTTTTGCTGGTGTTCTAAGCAAAAACTTCTGCATTACGCCTGTTTGTGGTTGCCTGTTATAAGATAACAGTAAAATCCATGCGTTTCTAAGGAGAAAATGAACAAAAGCTATCACTAAATCGTATTTCCAATAGAGGTTTCGTCCTCTTTGAAAGGGGTAGTTCATGAAAATTAGTTCATGGAAATGTTTATGATTTAGGTTGGAGTTATTAGGCGCAAAGAAGAAATATAAAAGGATAATTGAAGTTCTAAATCATTATGGTGATTGAGAGGCGTTATGAGCACAGCTAAGGAAAGTTAAGGAAAAAGGCACTCCAATGAGTAGTGCCAATGAATATTCTGGTCGTGATAGTATGAATCAAGATTACATCTAGGCAATCCATGGATATTATTATAGGTTTCTGTGGGCTGTTGGTTCGGTATTAAGTCAATTGTAGATGTAACCGAAGAAGAACTGAAGATTTAGGATACGAAGTATATAGGATAAGAGTTAGCGATCTTATCAGAAACTTTTTCTGAGTGGTGGGGATACATCTACTCCATTCAAAAGATATAATTCCTTGCGGGATTTTGGTGATTCCTTAAGATGTAGAGTACTACCCACACATACTAGCTGAAGCTGTAATTCATGAAATAAAGATAGAAAAATCTAGAAGGAAAATCAAAGGTTAAAGAAACGACTTTCCTTATGAATCAACTAAAAACATAAGATGAAGTGAGTTGCCCAAGTGGTCTAACATAATTTCTATTTATTAGGTGATAGGGCGAAACTGAAAGAAAAGAAATCTTCGAGATAGGGGTTTAAGCAAATCTGAAGTTGATATAATCATCCATCATGACAGGAGTCTGAGCACCCTTATGGCCAGCAAACAGCAAAAGCTATACTTGATGCTGACTATTTTGTTAAAATAATCAGGCCAGAGCTCACCTTAAATCTAAGTTAAACGCTTTCTTGGTCTATTCATGGGCTTAATGGCCTTACGCCAAACGCGCATGAGGAAGACATGTACGCAGCTCATTCTGCCTCTTTACAATCTGCATGTCTTTCCAGACAGGTAGGTGCTGCTATTTTAGATATAAAGGAAATTTAATTGCTGTTGGGCGCAATGATGTTCTAAATTTAACAGTGTGGCCTTTATAGTGCTGATGATGGTGAATGATCATCGCTGTGTCTACAAAGGTGGCAAATGTTACAATGAAGCAAGAAAATTAAATAAAGATAAATACAGCAAATATTGCTTTTCTGATAGGTTAAGAATTTGTCTGTTCAGTTAACTCAAGAACAAGCAGAAAAGGTTGCTGGAATGTCTACGAAGGTACTCCTGTATCATCAATCGACAGTACTCGCTCTATTCATGCTGAAATGGATGCTTCACAGCCCATCTTGCTAGACTCGAGATAGTGGTTTTGAAGATAAGGTTTTATATACAACTACGTTCCCCTGTCATAATTGTGCAGGGTATATTGTTGCTGTTGGTATCAATAAAGTTGTTTATTGAACATATGAAAAAGCAGCTTTAGAGTTGCTGATGATGCAATAACTAGAAGTTAACGAAAGTGGTAAAGTTTTATTTGAGTCCTTTGAAGGGGTTTCTACTGGAATATCATAGAAGTTCTTCTTTTCTACAGATGAAAGGATAGTAAGGTAATGCGGAGAAATATTCAACGAAGTATAAGAATCATATTGATATACAGTTTATTGATAGTTGGATTTTAATCGTGTGGCGGATATTTTCATTAACACAAAACAGATGCTGAAGCTCAAGTAGCCGTTCCATCTGGGACATAGTTAATCCGCTTCTGCCACCGATTCTCGACACCACCAACATCGGGTATGAATCTGTGACTCTGATGTTACAGAGCTTAATCTTGTGTACCAAAAACCACCATACCAACGGTGGTTTTCTCTGAGCTACTGCTCTTTGAGCCGAGGTAACTGGCTTGGAGGAGCTCAGTCACCAAAACTTGTTCTTTCAGTTTAGCCTTAACAGGCGCACAACTTAAGATGCTCCTCTAAATCAGTTACCAGTGGCTGCTGCCAGTGGCGCTTTGTCGTGCCTTCTGGGTTGGACTCAAGACGATAGTTACCGGGGCAGGCGCAGCGGTCGGACTGAACGGGGTTCGTGCGCTGGTCAGCTTGGGCGAACTGCCTGCGGAACGCTGAGTGTCAGGCGATGAGTAAAGTTTAAACAGCCATAACAGCAGGTGAAGAGCACCCCGGTGCCAAACCGAAGGCAGGAACAGAGCGCAGGGAGCTACCGGGGAAACGCAGGATCTTTATAGTCCTGTCCGGGTTTCGCCACCATGATTTGAGCGTCAGATTCTGTGATGCTTGTCAGGGGGCGGAGCCTATCGGAAAACCGGCAACGCGGCCTTTCTTGTTGCTTCTCCCATTCTCTCATTGCCTATGGCTTAATGTCTCTGTTCCCTCCGCTCGCCGCAGCGAACGACCGAGCGGGCGAGTCAGTGAGCGGAAGCGGAATATCTGCGGGCTTCTCTTTGGCACCGTACGCCATAGCGCATTTTAATACGATGCAGAATAGGGCGGGTACGCCGCAAAGTGACGTCACCTGACGTTCTGGATTACAAAGGTTAAAGCAGCGGACAGGAAATGTTTTGTGCCTAGCTATGCTATTCACAAGTAGCAGGACAGATGTGTTTTGGAGTACCATGACATAAAGACTCTGGTTAGCTCCCGCATGTTTGCTATCTTTGCTACCATTTGCTACTTTTGCTATCTCCAGGGTCTTCTGGTCTTTCAGTTGCTATCCTTTTGCTACTTTTGCTATCAAAATGCTACCTCTCCCTTCTTGCAATAAATGACCAAGGCACGTTAGCGATGTATACATCGCGCACCATAAGTGCCCCTTCCGAATCCCGTTCATCACTGTGTGATTAATCGAGGTTAAATCGACTACCAACGTAAAATCCTGCCATGCCTGACGGCTGACAACGCCCTCACGGTCGCGCAGTAAACTGCGCGCCCCTTTCACCGTTATCGGTGGGGTTCGTGGTGGCTTTCAGGGCGCTCGCCGGATTTTAACCGCTAAAATGAGCGATCCATGCGTTCGTG	LN:i:4357

Reviewer 2: This sequence seems to be too long to me, maybe you can trim it - just for this tutorial?

a	utg000001l	0	channel_364_204a2254-2b6f-4f10-9ec5-6d40f0b870e4_template:101-4457	+	4357
```

## Remapping using Minimap2

> The Assembly graph created can be used for mapping again with minimap2, but first the graph should be transformed to FASTA format. Remapping is done on the miniasm assembly to map the original reads on the assembly to provide the nucleotides per position. This is used by **Racon** {% icon tool %} for consensus construction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The assembly graph created can be used for mapping again with Minimap2, but first the graph should be transformed to FASTA format. Remapping is done on the Miniasm assembly to map the original reads on the assembly to provide the nucleotides per position. This is used by **Racon** {% icon tool %} for consensus construction.
```

> The Assembly graph created can be used for mapping again with minimap2, but first the graph should be transformed to FASTA format. Remapping is done on the miniasm assembly to map the original reads on the assembly to provide the nucleotides per position. This is used by **Racon** {% icon tool %} for consensus construction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Assembly graph created can be used for mapping again with minimap2, but first the graph should be transformed to FASTA format. Remapping is done on the miniasm assembly to map the original reads on the assembly to provide the read depth at each position. This is used by **Racon** {% icon tool %} for consensus construction.
```

not sure about read depth, think that's what's being described here or?

Reviewer: It's to improve the consensus base call, I rephrased for clarity, thanks!

>    - *"Single or Paired-end reads"*: `single`
>    - *"Select fastq dataset"*: The `Plasmids` collection
>    - *"Select analysis mode (sets default)"*: `PacBio/Oxford Nanopore read to reference mapping (-Hk19)`
>    - In the section **Set advanced output options**:
>       - *"Select an output format"*: `paf`
>
>
>     {% include snippets/select_collection.md %}
>
>     > ### {% icon question %} Question
>     >
>     > How many contigs do we have for the RB05 sample after the use of **Minimap2** {% icon tool %} and **Miniasm** {% icon tool %}?
>     > <br><br>
>     > Hint: run **Nanoplot** {% icon tool %} on the output of **GFA to Fasta** {% icon tool %}
>     >
>     > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
>     > > 22
>     > >
>     > > This can be determined by looking at the NanoStats output of NanoPlot.
>     > {: .solution }
>     {: .question}
{: .hands_on}

## Ultrafast consensus module using Racon

The mapped reads can be improved even more using **Racon** {% icon tool%} ({% cite Vaser2017 %}) to find a consensus sequence.
Racon is a standalone consensus module to correct raw contigs generated by rapid assembly methods which do not include a consensus step.

> Racon generates genomic consensus which is of similar or better quality compared to the output generated by assembly methods which employ both error correction and consensus steps.

Reviewer 2: That is a rather harsh claim. Is there a reference. If not can you make it sound less strong.

Reviewer 4: These evaluations all mainly depend on the complexity of the organism and their genomes, so I would say better to just refer to one of the benchmarking papers for further studies: e.g. these two https://doi.org/10.1101/530824 and https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbx147

Reviewer: thanks for the references @mmiladi will update

> This while providing a speedup of several times compared to those methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All while providing a speedup of several times compared to those methods.
```

It supports data produced by both Pacific Biosciences and Oxford Nanopore Technologies.
![Consensus Module](../../images/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/Racon.png)

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Consensus module
>
> 1. **Racon** {% icon tool %} with the following parameters
>   - *"Sequences"*: The `Plasmids` dataset collection
>   - *"Overlaps"*: the latest `PAF file` collection created by **Minimap2** {% icon tool %}
>   - *"Target sequences"*: the `FASTA file` collection created by **GFA to Fasta** {% icon tool %}
>
{: .hands_on}

The **Racon** {% icon tool %} output file gives the final contigs.

The output of RB04 should look something like:

```
>utg000001c LN:i:4653 RC:i:11 XC:f:0.888889

> AATGCAGCTATGGCGCGTGCGGTGCCAAGAAAGCCCGCAGATATTCCGCTTCCTCGCTCATTGACTCGTCTCGCTCGGTCGTTCGGCTGCGGCGAGCGAGGGAACAGAGACGATAAGCCATAGGCAATGAGAGAGAAGATGGAGAAGCAACAAGAAAGGCCGCGGCGTTGCCGGTTTTCCATAGGCTCGCGCCCCCTGACCAAGCATCACAGAATCTGACGCTCAAATCAGTGGTGGCGAAACCCGACAGGACTATAAAGATACCGGGCGTTTCCCTGGTGGCTCCCTCGTGCGCTCTCCTGTTCCTGCCTTTCGGTTTACCGGTGTCATTCCGCTGTTATGGCCGCGTTTGTCTCATTCCACGCCTGACACTCTCAGTTCCGGCAGGCAGTTCGCTCAAGCTGGACTGTATGCAATGAACCCCGTTCAGTTCGACCGCTGCGCCTGCCCGGTAATATCGTCTTGAGTCCAACCTGAGAAGGCACGACAAGCGCCACTGGCAGCAGCAGCCACTGAAACTGATTTAGAGGAGTATTCAAGTTGTGCGCCTGTTTGGCTAAACTGAAAGAACAAGTTTTGGTGACTAGACCTCAAGCCAGTTACCCTCCGGTTCAAAGTTGGTAGCTCAGAGAATTTTGAAAAACCACCGGTGGTAGCGGTGGATTTTCTTTCTTTGCAGAAGACAAGATTAAGCTCTGTGTAACATCAGAGTCAATGAATCTTCATACCGATGTTGTGGCGGGTGGCGAAGGAATCGGTGTAGAAGCCTTGGATTAATTGGCGTCCCAGATGGAACGGCTACTTGAGCTTCAGCATCTGTTTTGTGTTACTAATGAAAATATCCGCCACGGACGATTTTCAAAATCCACATAACTATCAATAAACTGTATATCAATATGATTCTTTATACTTCGTTGAATATTTCTCCGCATTACCTTTATCCTTCCTTTCATCTGTAGAAAAAGAAGAACTTATGATATCTCCTTGGTGAAACCCCTTCAAAGGACTCAAATAAAACCTTACCACTTTCGTTAACTTCAGTTATTGCATCATCGTGCAAACTCTAAAGCTAAGCTTTTTCATAAGGTTCAATGTAAACAACTTTATTGATACCAACAGCAACAATATGTCTCGCACAATTATGACAGGGAACGTAGTTGTATATAAAACCTTATCTTCAAACCACCATTCCCGAGTCTAGCAAGAGATGTAATAGCATCCATTTCAGCATGAATAGAGCGAGAGTACTCAATGATTGATGATACAGAGTACCTTAATAGATTATTCCAGCAACCTTTTCTGCTTGTTCTTGAGTTAACTGAACAGACAACTCCTTAACCTATCAGAAAGCAATATTTGCTGTATTTTATCTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTCTTACTTCATTGTAACATTTGCCACCTTTGTAGACACAGCGATGATCATTCACTCCATCATCAGCACTATAAAGGCCACCGTTAAATTTAGGAACATCATTGCGCCCAACAGCAATTAAATTTCCTTTATATCTAAATAGCAGCACCTACCTGTCTGGGAAAGACATGCAGATTGTAAAGAGGCAGAATGAGCTGTACATGCCCTTTCCTCATGCGCTGTTTCTCATTAAGCCCATGAATTGTGACCCAAGAAAGTGTTTAACTTTAGATTTAAGGTGAGCTTGATTAATAAAAATAGACAAGAAAGCGTTTCGTACTGTCATCTTCTCATGCGCGTTTATTAGGCCATTAAGCCCTTTGTGAGCTCTCTGGCCTTGATTATTTTTACATAATGGCATCAAATTATAGCTTTTTTGCTGTTTGCTGGCCTTAAGGGTGCTCAGACTTCCTGTCATGATGGATGATTACTCAACTTCAGATTTGCTTAAACCCTCATCTCGATTTCTTTTCTTTCAGTCTCGCTCCTAATAACACCTAATAAATAGAAATTATGTTGATAGACCATTCTAAGCAACTCAATTTCATCTTGGTGCTTTTAGTTGATCTATAAGGAAAGCTCGTTTCTTTAACTCTTTTGATTTTTCTCCTTCTAGATTTTTTTCTCTTTATTTCATATGAATTGCAAGCTTCAGCTAGTATGTGGGTAGTACTTACATCATAAGGAATCACCAAAATCCTGCAAAGAATTATATCTTTTGAATGGAGTAGATGTATCCCCACACCACTCAGAAAAAAGTTTCTGCAAGATCGCTAACTCTTATCCTATATACTTCGTATCCTAAATCTTCCAGTTCTTCTTCAGTTACATCTACAATTGACTTAATACTGAACCAACAGCCCCACAGAAAACCTATAATAATATCCATGGATTGCCTCTAGATGTAATCTGATCATATACTATCGATATATTCAGAAATATCTTCATTGGCACTACCATTGGAGTGCTCTTTTCCTTTAACTTCCTAGCTGTGCTCATAACGCCTCTCAATCACCATTTTAATGATTTAGAATCTTCAATTATCCTTTATAGCTTCTTCTCTTTTGCGCCTTAATAACTCCAACTCCAAATCATAAACATTTCCATGAACCACTCCTTTCATGAACTACCCCTCTTTCAAAGAGGACGAAACTCTATTGGAAATACGATTTAGTGATAGCTCTTTGCTCATATTTTCTCCTGCGAAACGCATGGATTTTACTGTTATCTTTATAACAGGCAACCACAAACAGGCGTAATGCGCAGAAGTTTTTTTTTGCTTAGAACACTGTGCAAAAAGAGTGAAAACTACACAAGTCTATGAAATAAATAAAAAGCTCTCGCATATTATGATTTTTAGTCTAGTTTAAGACTCTAAACATCGTGCTTAAGCACTCTCCCTGACTGCTTCATAGACCAGATGAAGCCCAAAACAAATCATGGCGAGAGGCACTCCCCATTCAACGTTTCCAGAAGAAACCCCTGAGCTCTCTAATAGGTGAAAGCCAGCAAGCAAAAACAAATAACCCCAGAAACATAATATCCTCCTAATCATCATTAGCAGCAAGAATCATACGGATACTTTCTGGGACAGTTTCACCTAGCGATAAAAGCAAACGAGCGGCCGTAGAGGCTTTTCTATGCTGACGAGCAACAGCGACAGCATGCCTCTGCTGACTAAACTGATACTCACGACGGTTGTAATAGTCATCAATGGCTTCTTGAGACAAATACGCAGACACGAACATACTCACCATCGCGGCTGATCTTCATGCTCAAAACAGGAACAAGAAGTGTTGTTGATGTGACTCAATCACCCGCCCTGATCATCGTAAAGGCGAATTTCTTCAGCACTCAGAAACTCTTTATCGAGAAGGCGGTTTAAAACACGAACGGCGTTAGCATAACGAGGGAGTAGTTAAAAGCTCTCATTGAGCACCTCCGCATACAAAAAAAAAGCAGAATGCAAGACGCGGCACGTTTGTGCATAGAAAGAATGGTAATGCCTGCACAGCACAAAATGCAGATTTTTAGGATCATGCTCAATCATGGAGACATCTCCGTTTTAAAAGAAAATTGTCACCCATATAGCAAAGTTGGCTGGAAACGGCGTCAATATTGAAGAGAAATGTATAAATATTGGTGTAGACGCGAACGCGTTTTTCACCATAATATGCCCCAAAGACATGACGTATGTCTTAACCAAACCCATGCAATATAGCTGCGGTACAGGGACTTTGAAGCGAGCTTGGCGGTTGCGTAGCTTCAAAGTCCCTTTGTTTTGTCCCTATAAGGGAACTTTTCGAGTGTACCATAACCTAGCTAGAGCCTGTTACTCTGCATCGTTAAAAATACAAGAATGCCATTTAAGCGCCTCTAAATAGCGCTGTATTGAGTTTTCATCTACCTTAATGGTAAACCATGAACCATCAAACAGTCGCTTCTTATAGCAGCATTCATGTGCTTTTTTTAGATGTTCTAAACGAGTCTCAAACCCTGAAAACTTGCATTGGCATACTTACCAACGGGCTATTTACCATAACATCCGTTGCCCGCACCATCTCAGACTCCCTCAGGGCATTTCTGCGTCCTCCTGCCTATTTCCGGCATCTTTCCTGTCCATATCGTGAAAAAACGCGCCTGATGATTTCTTCGCGTCTGCATGGCTATGCACGAACGCATGGACGTCATTTGCGGCTAAATCTGGCGAGCGCCCTGAAAGCCACCACGAACCCCACCGATAACGGTGAAAGGGTGCGCAGTTTACTGTGCGACCGTGAGGCGTTGGCCGTGCCGTCAGGCATGGCAGGATTTATTGCTAAGGGGGTCGGATTTAACCGATTAATCAGCACACAGTGATGAACGGATTCGAAGGGGCACTCTTTGGCGCGGCGATGTATACATCGCTAACGTGCCTTGGTCATTTATTGCAAGAAGGAGAGGTAGCATTTTGATAGCAAAAAAAGTAGCAAAAGGATAGCAACCGAAAGACCAGAAGACTCTGAGATAGCAAAAAGTAGCAAAATGGTAGCAAAAGATAGCAAACATGCGGGAGCTTCAACCAGAGTCTTTAGCGGGCCGGCGGCACCCAAAAAAACCACATCTTGTCCCGCTGTTTTGTGAATAAGCCAGCATAGCTGTGGGCACAAAACATTTCCCCTGTCCGCTGCTTTAACCTTTGTAATCCAGAACGTCAGGTGACGTCACTTTGCGGCATCGTATTAAAAT

Reviewer 2: Same here, maybe trim the sequence?

```

## Visualize assemblies using Bandage

> To get a sense of how well our data assembled, and to determine whether the contigs are chomosomal or plasmid DNA (the former being linear sequences while plasmids are circular molecules), **Bandage** {% icon tool %} can give a clear view of the assembly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To get a sense of how well our data was assembled, and to determine whether the contigs are chomosomal or plasmid DNA (the former being linear sequences while plasmids are circular molecules), **Bandage** {% icon tool %} can give a clear view of the assembly.
```

feel like original version was fine too but,dunno, reads slightly like it self assembled? Felt slightly off

**Bandage** {% icon tool%} ({% cite Wick2015 %}) (a **B**ioinformatics **A**pplication for **N**avigating **D**e novo **A**ssembly **G**raphs **E**asily), is a program that creates visualisations of assembly graphs.
Sequence assembler programs (such as **Miniasm** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Li2016 %}), **Velvet** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zerbino2008 %}), **SPAdes** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Bankevich2012 %}), **Trinity** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Grabherr2011 %}) and **MEGAHIT** {% icon tool %} {% cite Li2015 %}) carry out assembly by building a graph, from which contigs are generated.

> By visualisation of these assembly graphs, Bandage allows users to better understand, troubleshoot and improve their assemblies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By visualisation of these assembly graphs, Bandage allows users to better understand, troubleshoot, and improve their assemblies.
```

> By visualisation of these assembly graphs, Bandage allows users to better understand, troubleshoot and improve their assemblies.

Reviewer 2: the assemblies?

**PlasFlow** {% icon tool %} is a set of scripts used for prediction of plasmid sequences in metagenomic contigs.
It relies on the neural network models trained on full genome and plasmid sequences and is able to differentiate between plasmids and chromosomes with accuracy reaching 96%.

![Pairwise alignment](../../images/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/PlasFlow.png)

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Prediction of plasmid sequences
>
> 1. **PlasFlow** {% icon tool %} with the following parameters
>   - *"Sequence Reads"*: the `Final Assembly` collection created by **Unicycler** {% icon tool %}
>
> > ### {% icon question %} Question
> >
> > What is the classification of contig_id 0 in RB10? (Hint: Check the probability table created by PlasFlow)
> >
> > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > > plasmid.Proteobacteria
> > >
> > > This can be determined by looking at the 5th column of the probability table.
> > {: .solution }
> {: .question}
{: .hands_on}

> The most important output of **PlasFlow** {% icon tool %} is a tabular file containing all predictions (specified with `--output` option), consisting of several columns including:

Reviewer 2: Not sure if `(specified with `--output` option)` is useful here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important output of **PlasFlow** {% icon tool %} is a tabular file containing all predictions, consisting of several columns including:
```

```
contig_id 	contig_name 	contig_length 	id 	label 	...
```

where:

- `contig_id`is an internal id of sequence used for the classification
- `contig_name` is a name of contig used in the classification
- `contig_length` shows the length of a classified sequence
- `id` is an internal id of a produced label (classification)
- `label` is the actual classification
- `...` represents additional columns showing probabilities of assignment to each possible class

Additionally, PlasFlow produces FASTA files containing input sequences binned to plasmids, chromosomes and unclassified.

# Antibiotic Resistance

## Scan genome contigs for antimicrobial resistance genes

To determine whether the contigs contain antimircobial resistance genes (AMR) [staramr](https://github.com/phac-nml/staramr) can be used.

> **Staramr** {% icon tool %} (*AMR) scans bacterial genome contigs against both the **ResFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zankari2012 %}), **PointFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zankari2017 %}) and **PlasmidFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Carattoli2014 %})  databases (used by the ResFinder webservice)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Staramr** {% icon tool %} scans bacterial genome contigs against both the **ResFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zankari2012 %}), **PointFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zankari2017 %}), and **PlasmidFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Carattoli2014 %}) databases (used by the ResFinder webservice)
```

> **Staramr** {% icon tool %} (*AMR) scans bacterial genome contigs against both the **ResFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zankari2012 %}), **PointFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Zankari2017 %}) and **PlasmidFinder** {% icon tool %} ({% cite Carattoli2014 %})  databases (used by the ResFinder webservice)

Reviewer 2: ResFinder and Co are the databases, so the tool-icon could be confusing here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Staramr** {% icon tool %} (*AMR) scans bacterial genome contigs against  the **ResFinder** ({% cite Zankari2012 %}), **PointFinder** ({% cite Zankari2017 %}) and **PlasmidFinder** ({% cite Carattoli2014 %})  databases (used by the ResFinder webservice)
```

>   - *"genomes"*: the `Final Assembly` collection created by **Unicycler**
>
> > ### {% icon question %} Question
> >
> > Which samples contained the resistance gene: dfrA17?
> >
> > Hint: Check the resfinder.tsv created by staramr
> >
> > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > > RB01, RB02, and RB10
> > >
> > > This can be determined by looking at the 2nd column of the resfinder.tsv output (and the first column for the sample names).
> > {: .solution }
> {: .question}
{: .hands_on}

There are 5 different output files produced by **staramr** {% icon tool %}:

1. `summary.tsv`:  A summary of all detected AMR genes/mutations in each genome, one genome per line.
2. `resfinder.tsv`: A tabular file of each AMR gene and additional BLAST information from the **ResFinder** database, one gene per line.
3. `pointfinder.tsv`: A tabular file of each AMR point mutation and additional BLAST information from the **PointFinder** database, one gene per line.
4. `settings.txt`: The command-line, database versions, and other settings used to run `staramr`.
5. `results.xlsx`: An Excel spreadsheet containing the previous 4 files as separate worksheets.

> The summary file is most important and gives all the resistance genes found.

Reviewer 2: gives --> provides?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The summary file is most important and gives all the resistance genes found.
```

## CARD database
To get more information about these antibiotic resistant genes, you can check the [CARD database](https://card.mcmaster.ca) (**C**omprehensive **A**ntibiotic **R**esistance **D**atabase) ({% cite Jia2016 %})

> ![Screenshot of the CARD database](../../images/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/card_database.png "Screenshot of the CARD database interface. CARD gives information about the antibiotic resistance genes, as well as link to relevant publications.")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of the CARD database](../../images/plasmid-metagenomics-nanopore/card_database.png "Screenshot of the CARD database interface. CARD gives information about the antibiotic resistance genes, as well as links to relevant publications.")
```
